[BLANK_AUDIO]
So, what makes up an R package?
So, there are several of essential
elements and
then there are a number of, optional
elements.
So, the first thing you do when you create
an R
package is you need to create a directory
on your file system.
And so this is done in a variety of
different ways depending
on what platform you're on, but it always
starts out with, a directory.
And it's, and it's typical to name the
directory to, to be
the same as the name of the package, so if
you're name.
If your package is you know, my package,
then you would name the directory my
package.
It's not, and so, it's, so that's
a convention pretty much amongst all our
packages.
The next thing that you need to have in a
package is what's
called a description file, and this has
some meta data about the package.
Of course you need some R code in an R
sub-directory.
You need to have some documentation for
the R code.
This is typically in the man
sub-directory.
A namespace file is optional, but it's
very common, and
I, and I encourage you to have a namespace
file.
And then if you want to know what all the,
the full
requirements are, you can look in the
Writing R Extensions document.
That's available on the R website.
So what does it mean, the first thing is
the description file.
After you've created the R directory you
can put in a description file in
there and these are the elements that you
need to have in the description file.
First of course is the name of the
package.
The title is a slightly longer kind of
description of the package beyond just the
name.
And then the description field is an even
longer description.
This could be a
a sentence, or maybe even a sentence or
two, and then the version number, which is
going to usually in the format of a major
number dot minor number dash and then
patch level.
It doesn't have to be in that format, but
that's common.
The name of the author, so this can be the
name of the person that wrote the original
code it may not be you if someone else
wrote the original code, but it could be
you.
The maintainer is very important because
this is the, this will be the name of
the person who, who who maintains the
package and the year of their email
address.
So, if there are any problems with the
package, there's an email attached
to the maintainer and that person
has taken responsibility for addressing
any problems.
And then finally there just as important
is the license for the source code.
And so the license describes you know,
what are the terms that
the source code are being, the source code
is being released under and
some common licenses for source code for R
code are things like
the GNU public general license or the or
BSD license or MIT license.
You typically a kind of standard open
source license is used.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
Um,other fields that you can put into the
description
file that are optional but are commonly
use are Depends.
And this is a list of R packages that your
package will depend on.
So often if you are writing R code you
will use code from
other packages and that needs to be listed
here in the depends field.
Suggests is another list of our packages
that you may want
the users to have installed but aren't
strictly essential to writing the R-code.
Then the date, it just indi, indicates the
release date of the package.
The ur, if your package has a home page.
You can list the url for the home page.
I often list the you know, to the
GitHub repository, for this for each of
the packages.
And then you can add other fields to
the description file just for your own
benefit.
But these will generally be ignored by R.
So here's an example of description file
from the GPC lib package.
So here you can see the, the name of the
package is GPC lib.
The title is the, General Polygon Clipping
Library for R.
The description is the general polygon
clipping routines for
R based on this C library by Alan Murta.
The version, we're calling that 1.5-5.
So I am the author but there have
been a number of con, contributions from
other people.
I'm also the maintainer.
And so, there's my email address there for
the maintainer.
the, this package has a special license.
And so I, I, I, the details of which are
found in the license files.
That's why I kept this file license there.
The it depends on r being at least version
2.14, so that's a fairly old version.
Most people will have a version that's
greater than that.
And it also depends on the methods
package, import functions from the
graphics package.
I'll talk more about that when I talk
about the name space file.
And then the release date for this package
was April 1st, 2013 and then there's a
URL for the web, website on the kind
of underlying C library and the GitHub
repository.
Once you've written up your description
file, the next thing you
want to do, typically is copy your R code
into the R sub-directory.
Now there can be any number of files in
this directory.
You don't have to have all your R code in
a single file.
furthermore, you don't, but you don't have
to
have, like, you know, one file per every
function.
So you can organize it however you want.
Doesn't matter what the number of files
is.
But you typically want to separate, have a
separate files, for kind of logical groups
of functions, so all the functions that,
you know, read data go in one file.
Now all of the functions that maybe fit
model go into a different file.
So all the R, your R codes should be
included here, and
anything that you want to make available
through the package it should not.
You should not include an R code in any
other part of the package.
The name space file is useful because
it indicates essentially the API for your
function.
It also lists all the dependencies so, you
know, code that your package uses from
other packages.
So there's two kinds of things.
The first is the export, so you want to
indicate which functions in
your package are exported, so these are
available to the user; these
are the public functions, and so
non-exported functions, the functions that
are
not listed in this file, cannot be called
directly by the user.
There are, unless they kind of use some
special functions to access that code.
So these are not available in general to
the public.
And this allows you to hide the
implementation details from users.
And makes for a generally cleaner package
interface.
The other thing you need to indicate
beyond, besides exports,
is imports, so you can import functions
from other packages.
And this, so this allows your package to
make use of
other packages without making other
packages, you know visible to the user.
Typically if you load a package and it
depends on a lot of other packages
you don't necessarily want all those other
packages to be loaded into the search list
for example for the user to see and so
this allows you to use the
functionality of other packages without
having to
load every other package onto the search
list.
And so importing a function, loads the
package name
space, but it doesn't attach it to the
search list.
So a couple of key directives for the name
space
file or the export, for, where you can
export a function.
Import is for importing a package and then
import from is
for importing a function for a specific
function from a package.
So this allows you to kind of very
specifically
describe your dependencies, and the public
API for your package.
If you're using s4 classes and methods
some important directives
are the export classes directive and the
export methods one.
Although these things look like R
functions it's
important to realize that they aren't
exactly R functions.
So here's a sample name space file from
the mvtspolt package.
This package only has one function.
It's export it's called mvtsplot, it's a
plotting function for multi variate time
series.
So that is the only function that the user
can call when this function is loaded.
It imports the access function from the
graphics package.
And it also imports this, the, all the
functionality of the splines package.
So that's basically it.
It's a very simple name space file.
Here's another, slightly more complicated
name space file
from the gpclib package that we just saw.
There are two functions exported here, the
read polyfile and the write polyfile.
We import the plot function from the
graphics package and then
there are two s4 classes that are exported
to the user.
These are GPC.poly and GPC.poly.nohole.
And then there are a number of methods
that are exported
to the user including the show method are
and get.bbox et cetera.
So these are methods that apply to these
new classes that are defined, the gpc.poly
class.
And these are all the methods that are
available to the user for this class.
Once you've got the description file, the
R code, and the
name space file and the next thing to
d-deal with is documentation.
So documentation is very important because
it allows the user to
kind of understand how your function is
suppose to be used.
And documentation files typically have a
capital R and then D extension.
And they're placed in the mend
sub-directory of the package directory
structure.
They're written in a specific markup
language which I'll show in just
a second and a documental file is required
for every supported function.
And so that provides another reason to
limit the
number of functions that are exported to
the user.
Because for any every function that you
export
you have to write a, a documentation for
it.
But in, the functions that are not
exported you don't need to have
any documentation for because they're not
meant to be used by, by the user.
You can also document things that are not
functions.
You can document data sets.
You can document kind of basic concepts.
Or you can provide a basic package
overview.
So these are all things that you can
provide as documentation.
So here's a simple help file.
This is from the Line function, this is
just
part of the, kind of the base R
installation.
You can see that there's a name for the
docu, for the documentation.
There's an alias, see, this is something
that will call
up this documentation file, even if if
you, if you do
question mark line, then, you know,
anything that's in the alias
will call up this documentation file, so
you'll do question mark.
Your residuals [UNKNOWN] line.
You'll also get this help file.
And you can see that the title is, you
know, robust line fitting.
And there's a description, which is a
slightly longer description than just the
title.
After the description you typically have a
usage section which describes
or shows how the function is called on, on
its arguments.
So this function only has two arguments, x
and y, and so that's how you call it.
After that you need to describe what the
arguments are.
And so the two arguments are x and y and
you can see
that they are, the arguments can be any
way of specifying x,y pairs.
After the describing the arguments, you
talk, there's a detailed section where
you typical go into more detail about
various aspects of the function.
Here there's just a few kind of a notes
that are added.
And then lastly there's a value section.
The value section determines, describes,
you
know, what is returned by the function.
So some functions don't necessarily return
anything
useful, in particular, plotting functions
often don't
return anything, they just have a side
effect of kind of creating a plot.
And so her,.in this case the line function
returns an object of class tukeyline.
Finally at the end you might have
something, some
references, for example, if we're
implementing a method, a
statistical method or something along
those lines and it
has a reference like a paper or a book.
In this case it's a book.
You can put those references in the help
files,
so people will know if they want to
explore
this thing a little bit more, if they
want to
read more about it, they know where to
look.
So that's your help, that's kind of how
the help files look.
Once you've got your R code, your R files,
your description and your name space then
you can start
by building the package and there's a
command line
tool that comes with R, it's called R CMD
build.
And it creates the package archive file,
which simply has .tar or .gz extension.
Once you've built the package you can run
a battery of tests on the package.
So you can do this, use this, you can
do this by running the R Cmd check
command-line program.
And this runs a whole set of tests to make
sure that there's some, that everything
is kind of consistent within the package
structure
and you haven't, for example, forgotten
any documentation.
Or that the, kind of the exports and
the imports are, are kind of appropriately
specify.
You can run R Cmd build and R Cmd check
from
the command line, using a terminal or
command shell type of application.
You could also run them from the, from
with
in R using the system function in this
way.
R Cmnd check runs a, I said, I mentioned
already runs a battery of tests.
Basically it checks for example, if the
documentation
exists, if every, or exported function has
documentation.
It checks to see whether your code can be
loaded it
also checks the, kind of the coding style,
so that there's
no, kind of, basic problems there's a bit
of, there's actually
a code checker in the, in, in one of the
tests.
It checks for any errors that may, kind
of, or common coding problems that may
occur.
If you have any examples in your
documentation, it will
run the examples to make sure that they
actually run.
It will check that the documentation of
the arguments in
your documentation matches the arguments
that are in the codes so
for example sometimes you might modify the
argument list, of
a function in your code then forget to
modify the argument
list in the documentation so it will check
for that
kind of mismatch And in particular, this,
this is important because
if you want to put a package on CRAN, it
has
to pass all of the tests in R Cmnd Check
without
any warnings or any errors.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
So that's the basic idea behind R
packages.
If you want to get started, a handy
function to look at is package.skeleton.
And what this does is, it basically create
the skeleton directory structure.
So you'll create the directory if you pass
it the name of a function.
So that's usually the first argument to
package.skeleton.
It'll create the directory, it'll create
the R directory, the man directory.
It will create a, kind of a dummy
description file for you to fill out.
It will also create a namespace file for
then you can kind of flesh out.
And it will put some documentation files
in the man directory
if you have any functions that are visible
in your work space.
So by default it takes all the functions
that are kind of in your
work space and writes them out to the R
directory and the man directory.
So if you have any, if you have a lot of
extraneous functions in your work space
you don't want to run this function.
But if you, if all the functions that you
kind of have in your workspace,
okay you want to put into the package,
then
it will automatically do all that for you.
So then all the documentation stubs are in
the Man age.
You just have to edit them to kind of
customize them to your need.
And so you need to fill in all this extra
stuff.
So the basic summary is that, you know, R
packages
are a systematic way to make R code
available to others.
It's very useful and it, and it's
a standard way that kind of people
understand.
The standards are important because they
ensure that packages have a minimal amount
of, at least some documentation and will
some robustness to kind of problems.
And you typically obtain our packages from
CRAN, Bioconductor, GitHub, or other types
of repositories.
The basic check list for creating in
R package, is basically create a new
directory.
Create the R in the main sub-directories.
You can also use packet skeleton for this.
You need to write a description file, you
need
to put your R code in to the R
sub-directory.
You need to write documentation files in
to the main sub-directory.
Create a name space file, which defines
your exports and imports.
And then, and then build it and check your
package to make sure it passes all the
checks.
So that's your basic template for building
an R package.